---
title: "From python2 to python3"
date: 2018-06-07T16:41:57+08:00
categories:
    - tech
tags:
    - lang-en
    - python
---

This article won't provide perfect guide for porting py2 code to py3, just list the solutions I tried, the
problems I come to, and my choices. I haven't finished this project, also I haven't gave up so far :).

Won't explain too much about the differences between py2 and py3, will write down some corner
 cases which are easy to miss.

The codebase I'm working on:

- Only support python2.7, don't consider python2.6
- 1X repos, about half a million lines of code in total (calculated by cloc).
- These repos will import each other, bad design from early days, not easy to resolve, which means I can't switch to py3 one by one, I need write
py2/3 compatiblility code for them, and switch together(I'm also considering solve the import problem first).
- Test coverage is not good, best is around 80%, lowest is 30%.

## Tools

`2to3`, a command line tools packaged with py2, it's a oneway porting to convert your code to py3, new code won't work under
py2, since I need be compatible with py2 and py3 for long time, didn't try it.

[future](http://python-future.org/), it tries to make you write single clean python3.x code without ugly hack with six. I used it it first,
but come to many problems, will explain later.

[modernize](https://python-modernize.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), rewrite your code with `six`. I mainly use it, but some code it still can't detect.


## Things out of tools

### hash function

Internal implementation of `hash` has changed in py3, you shouln't rely on result of `hash` in py2/3, but you need be aware of the difference. Unfortunately,
old system relies on py2's `hash` for some reason, so I reimplement it in py3 with a c extension: https://github.com/monsterxx03/legacyhash,  only support bytes and unicode. 

Tools won't check your usage of `hash`, you need to check it by yourself, maybe consider write a customized [fixer](http://python3porting.com/fixers.html) for it?

### json

Before python3.6, `json.loads` only accept str(unicode in python3), not bytes. You'd better upgrade to python3.6 directly to avoid this problem.

`json.dumps` output is `str` in both py2/3, but `str` is bytes in py2, unicode in py3, other code may be broken.

### redis

return value from redis client is always bytes in py3, since boundary of bytes and unicode in py2 is very obscure, it may cause problem.

### List comprehension can't access class scope

    class A(object):
        test1 = 'a'
        test2 = [test1 for _ in range(10)] 

will report `NameError: name 'test1' is not defined`.

In py3 list comprehension's working scope is changed to avoid bleeding variables from local scope. Details can see: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/13905741/accessing-class-variables-from-a-list-comprehension-in-the-class-definition


A workaround is:

    class A(object):
        test1 = 'a'
        test2 = (lambda test1=test1: [test1 for _ in range(10)])()

### Dynamic generated code

If you have some scripts to generate  python code dynamically like me, don't forget to fix them.

## Problems with future

### standard lib changes

Many standard libs have change names or structure in py3, future try to let you import py3 name directly with the hack of `future.standard_library.install_aliases()`,
it will modified the `sys.modules` to make new module name point to a backported version from `future.backports`, but it maybe break your code in py2. 

One example is `urljoin`, in py2 it's `from urlparse impor urljoin`, in py3 `from urllib.parse import urljoin`, but the internal implementation
is different.

In py2, urljoin can mix bytestring and unicode: `urljoin(b'http://localhost', u'a/b')` works, but in py3, it will report `TypeError: Cannot mix str and non-str arguments`, if you use future's backport version, will come to this issue as well. Some third part libs will breake due to this behavior, eg: eventbrite's python sdk.

raven(sentry's client) also come to problem due to this runtime replacement. To avoid third part libs issue, I didn't use future's `install_aliases()`.

For `modernize`, it will genearate code with `six`, eg: `from six.moves.urllib.parse import urljoin`, in py2, it will still use py2's urljoin. I perfer this way.

### builtins

future try to backport py3's data type to py2 via `builtins` modules, but it may break your py2 code due to type check.

    from builtins import str

    isinstance('1', str)  # False, since str is actually unicode type in py3
    isinstance(u'1', str) # True

`buidins.object` try to fix the `next` and `__next__` differences between py2/3, but it may break, if you overwrite `__getattr__` function in class.

    from builtins import object

    class A(object):
        def __getattr__(self, key):
            return 'test'

    a = A()
    if a:
        print('ok')

will report `AttributeError: type object 'A' has no attribute '__bool__'`
